docs: add x402 payment standard page under AI Studio on Hedera (#550)
hashgraph/hedera-docs: hedera/open-source-solutions/ai-studio-on-hedera/x402.mdx

---
title: "x402 Payment Standard on Hedera"
sidebarTitle: "x402 Payments"
description: "Programmable, HTTP-native payments for apps and AI agents using Hedera's official x402 payment scheme."
---

[x402](https://www.x402.org/) is an open payment standard that reuses the existing HTTP `402 Payment Required` status code to let a server ask for payment, and let a client pay, inside an ordinary HTTP request/response cycle. It turns a payment into something a client can satisfy as easily as it follows a redirect — no checkout page, account signup, or API-key dance required.

Hedera contributes its own **`exact` payment scheme and a reference implementation** to the official [x402 repository](https://github.com/x402-foundation/x402), so applications and AI agents can settle payments in HBAR or HTS tokens over x402 with the speed and low, predictable fees of the Hedera network.

<Info>

> For the background story and Hedera's perspective on why this matters, read the announcement: [**Hedera and the x402 Payment Standard**](https://hedera.com/blog/hedera-and-the-x402-payment-standard/).

Reviewer: this renders on the site but not in github diff

Reviewer 2: Ah my bad, realized this shortly after go through the rest of the review but forgot to remove it from the review. Good catch

</Info>

## What x402 actually is (and what it is not)

> x402 is best understood as **the missing payment layer of the web**: HTTP can move information instantly, but it has never had a native, standardized way to move money. x402 fills exactly that gap — and nothing more.

Reviewer 2: Maybe you can reference the http 402 protocol here for historical reference for the user (not important though): https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/Reference/Status/402

> It is easy to over-read x402 as a magic switch that suddenly lets "agents use crypto" for anything. The real scope is much narrower and much more useful for it.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
It is easy to over-read x402 as a magic switch that suddenly lets "agents use crypto" for anything. The real scope is much narrower then that and spans multiple use-cases.
```

<Columns cols={2}>
  <Card title="What x402 IS" icon="circle-check">

>     - An **HTTP-native standard** for a single, discrete request → pay → response handshake

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    - A **HTTP-native standard** for a single, discrete request → pay → response handshake
```

Reviewer: 'An' is the correct use so no need to apply this suggestion

    - **Stateless and per-request** — each payment is self-verifying, with no billing session or subscription
    - **Settlement-agnostic** — works across chains and assets; on Hedera it settles in HBAR or HTS tokens
    - A **shared rulebook** so any wallet or service can negotiate value the same way it negotiates data
  </Card>
  <Card title="What x402 is NOT" icon="circle-xmark">

>     - **Not a blockchain or a new payment network** — it rides on top of existing rails

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    - **Not a blockchain or a new payment network** — it lives on top of existing rails
```

    - **Not a custodial processor** — facilitators verify and submit, but can never move funds without a signed authorization
    - **Not for streaming or multi-hop routing** — it is optimized for discrete request/response cycles, not continuous value flows
    - **Not a general "agentic wallet"** — it is one well-scoped primitive, not an autonomy framework
  </Card>
</Columns>

## Who uses it and what it is useful for

> x402 shines wherever value needs to change hands **per request, at machine speed, without a human in the loop**:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
x402 shines whenever value needs to change hands **per request, at machine speed, without a human in the loop**:
```

- **AI agents** paying for API calls, context, datasets, inference, or tool use on demand
- **Paid APIs and per-request metering** — bill for exactly what is consumed instead of selling subscriptions or API keys
- **Pay-per-view digital content** — articles, reports, research papers, sensor feeds, OCR, translations

> - **Micropayments at internet scale** — amounts too small to justify a checkout flow or card fee

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **Micropayments at internet scale** — amounts too small to justify a checkout flow or a card fee
```

> Because the payment is just an HTTP exchange, it composes cleanly with the web you already run — reverse proxies, CDNs, TLS, and REST or GraphQL APIs all stay in place.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Because the payment is just an HTTP exchange, it composes cleanly with the web technologies you are already familiar with — reverse proxies, CDNs, TLS, and REST or GraphQL APIs.
```

import { PrivateKey } from "@hiero-ledger/sdk";

const signer = createClientHederaSigner(
  "0.0.1111",
  PrivateKey.fromString(process.env.HEDERA_PRIVATE_KEY!),
  { network: "hedera:testnet" }
);

// Register the scheme for any Hedera network and let the client
// auto-handle 402 responses by signing and retrying.
const client = new x402Client().register(
  "hedera:*",
  new ExactHederaScheme(signer)
);
```

**Resource server** — register the scheme and declare the asset you accept:

```typescript server.ts
import { x402ResourceServer } from "@x402/core/server";
import { ExactHederaScheme } from "@x402/hedera/exact/server";

const server = new x402ResourceServer(facilitatorClient);

server.register(
  "hedera:*",
  new ExactHederaScheme({
    defaultAssets: {
      "hedera:testnet": { asset: "0.0.6001", decimals: 6 },
      "hedera:mainnet": { asset: "0.0.9001", decimals: 6 },
    },
  })
);
```

The `facilitatorClient` points at a facilitator that supports Hedera (see below). The resource server uses it to `/verify` and `/settle` payments without holding funds or running its own node.

## Requirements and limitations

<Warning>

> x402 is a focused primitive, not a turnkey payments product. Plan around these constraints.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
x402 is a focused primitive, not a turnkey payments product. Be sure to plan around these constraints according to your use-case(s).
```

| | Value |
| --- | --- |
| Facilitator base URL (testnet) | `https://api.testnet.blocky402.com` |
| Capability discovery | `GET /supported` |
| Verify endpoint | `POST /verify` |
| Settle endpoint | `POST /settle` |
| Hedera network | `hedera:testnet` |
| Advertised fee payer | `0.0.7162784` |
| Documentation | [blocky402.com/docs](https://blocky402.com/docs/) ([quickstart](https://blocky402.com/docs/quickstart/), [API reference](https://blocky402.com/docs/api-reference/), [networks](https://blocky402.com/docs/networks/)) |

You can confirm Hedera support live by querying the facilitator's capabilities:

```bash
curl https://api.testnet.blocky402.com/supported
```

The response lists `hedera:testnet` among the supported `kinds`, along with the fee-payer account the facilitator will sponsor. Mainnet support is rolling out and will require an API key.

<Tip>
Point the `facilitatorClient` in your resource server at `https://api.testnet.blocky402.com` to verify and settle Hedera testnet payments through Blocky402.
</Tip>

### Run your own Hedera facilitator

> x402 is permissionless: any team can operate a facilitator, and the more independent Hedera facilitators there are, the healthier the network. To stand one up:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
x402 is permissionless: any team can operate a facilitator, and the more independent Hedera facilitators there are, the healthier the network. Below are the steps to follow to stand one up for yourself:
```
